# Predictive-Analysis-on-Road-Accident-Risks-Based-on-Heterogeneous-Sparse-Data
The intention of this project is to analyse this accidental data-set to identify the accident hot spot areas and take appropriate measures to decrease the rate of the accident and identify the situations in which the accident happens and take precautions to prevent the accident.
# Dataset
The dataset is the country wise road accident dataset containing records of traffic accidents in US from 2016-2019. The dataset is colleceted from kaggle, the link is : https://www.kaggle.com/sobhanmoosavi/us-accidents
# Goals
1.  Identify Accident hostspots and take appropriate measures to decrease the rate of the accident
2.  Identify the rush hours.
3.  Predicting accident severity index based on the weather conditions.
# Visualization
All the necessary visualization has been done using the raw data. The correlation heatmap is genrated to find out which factors are affecting the severity index the most. Various charts has been genrated to find the data disribution of the different attributes. This is done in visualization.ipynb file.
# Preprocessing
In the data preprocessing stage, the dataset is analyzed to find the missing values and handling them as such, by either filling up with suitable values or 0. Python’s ‘numpy’ class is used to handle the missing data. Few columns are discarded in order to refine the dataset for better predictions, as unnecessary columns might lead to deviation from proper predictions. The required features are hence chosen for carrying out the prediction functionalities. Categorical data is also encoded into numerical data for the sake of calculations and for fitting purpose in the machine learning models. LabelEncoder class of scikit learn is used for the process. This is done in us_accident_preprocess.ipynb file.
# Finding Accident Hotspots
To find the accident hotspot, we have used the DBSCAN clustering algorithm. DBSCAN is a density based clustering algorithm, it does a great job of seeking areas in the data that have a high density of observations, versus areas of the data that are not very dense with observations. It mainly uses two parameters: ‘eps’ or the epsilon value that defines the neighborhood around a data point .If the distance between two points is lower or equal to ‘eps’ then they are considered as neighbors. We have taken 36.6 km area as per earth’s radius to determine the epsilon value; the other parameter is min points which define the minimum number of data points in a neighborhood. We have used the “Euclidean distance formula” to calculate the distance between two points in order to determine neighborhood. Thus the clusters formed show high densities of accidents which might occur on the basis of turning point, bumps, crossings, etc. This is done in hotspot_prediction.ipynb file.
# Finsing Rush Hours
Rush hours are the times that have potential of accidents. We have located the rush hours using visualization methods. We have used seaborn and matplotlib libraries to visualize the data and locate the rush hours. We have used matplotlib’s barplot to visualize and find the rush hours. The bar plot have used the number of accidents occurred, and the time in terms of 24 hours to find the rush hour. The results thus obtained are satisfactory and accurate. this thing is clear from the visualization part.
# Predicting Accident Severity based on weather conditions
For the classification purpose we have used supervised learning algorithm multilayer perceptron neural networks. The network is made of 3 fully connected layer with activation function “sigmoid”. For the first layer i.e. the input layer 25 neurons are used; in the second i.e. in the hidden layer 50 neurons are used and in the final layer i.e. the output layer is consisting of only 5 neurones. For optimizing we have used SGD (Stochastic Gradient Descent) Optimizer. The model is trained for 10 epochs with batch size of 32. The model is giving alsmost 68% accuracy. This is done in us_accident_training_based_on_weather_conditions.ipynb file.
# Scope
The future plan with this project is to connect iot device with the deep learning model using rashberry pi which will take weather condition inputs from the enviornment and then fed them to the deep learning model which will predict the severity index of the accident in that weather so that appropriate measures can be taken to avoid accident.
